[Music.]
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Most every World War II veteran counts themselves lucky to have survived to tell their story when so many did not.
Ray Adkins service came near the war's end, but included 82 days fighting in the Pacific's bloodiest battle, Okinawa, the battle that killed more than 12,000 Americans and left another 36,000 wounded.
As a member of a special weapons unit in the 1st Marines Division, his was the third wave to storm the beach that April 1st, 1945.
Okinawa was to be a main staging area for the ground assault on Japan, the assault that never happened because of the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
over the next two episodes of Veterans of the Valley.
We'll hear not only some of Ray Adkins' war stories from World War II, but some of his stories of a legendary 38-year high school football coaching career.
One that produced a quarterback named Marty Adkins, who went on to run Darryl Royall's wishbone attack at the University of Texas.
And we'll talk about Ray Adkins, the proud grandfather of another quarterback you may recognize, a fellow named Drew Brees.
Please welcome Coach Ray Adkins to Veterans of the Valley.
Ray, it's more than an honor to meet you, to know you, and to have you on Veterans of the Valley.
Let's talk about when you were in high school as a junior in Brady, that's when Pearl Harbor was attacked, December 7, 1941.
So you knew then that you were going to be in the military and you were going to be going to war eventually, right?
Absolutely.
We knew that.
And we wanted to do something, you know, for our country.
And about 10 of us from Brady boys about in February that year decided that we wanted to go join up.
And so we got our diplomas early.
Right.
And we went to San Antonio and us 10 and there was about 100 boys that wanted to be in the Marines.
And so they gave us quite a few tests, mental tests and physical tests and
thinking quick, making quick decisions.
And I believe there was about 10 that they picked out of that 100.
And I happened to be one of those.
And then we got to San Diego, California.
And so I would say that when we got through with boot camp, there was about three of those 10
that were still left there.
And I could tell a lot of stories that they don't do now to train, you know, like they used to.
Right.
When you went to San Diego, you were a teenager, and I think you said, I read that your dad took you to the train station, and he gave you some advice as he put you on the train.
What was that?
He did, and I think it's good advice today.
You know, my dad and mother never smoked or drank or anything like that, and he didn't, and actually we had been grown up that way, and so we rode a horseback in, really.
And he took my horse back home, but he said, son, now when you get on that train, you're going to be, they're going to say, have a smoke, boy, or have, you know, buddy, have a drink.
And I said, he said, now, you know,
When you have a question that you don't know about, he said, just say, what would my mother and daddy say?
And that's your answer right there.
And sure enough, when I got on the train, you know, have a smoke or have a drink.
And I think a lot of young people, they think they're kind of pressured into it.
But, you know, I told those young men that was doing that, I said, look, I respect your choices and what you want to do.
You respect mine.
Right.
And if you don't respect mine, then I'm not going to cooperate at all with you.
And you still had neither, right?
I never smoked a cigarette in my life, and you could put all the other stuff in one beer can.
Exactly.
You got away from home, and you got a quick taste of the Marines.
A pretty rough drill instructor, I understand.
Yes, I sure did.
I'll tell you this.
I even, you know, we were out on the parade ground, and I...
I was thinking about home and we were coming in on the parade ground after being out in the boondocks.
And he hollered up there.
They didn't you didn't have a name.
You had a number.
Right.
And I believe my name was my number was 64.
I didn't I always when they'd call out a number, I'd say, oh, man, I hope he hears it.
But that day I didn't hear mine.
You know, and first thing I know, I'm jerked out of that line and knocked down on there, you know, throw down on the ground and on the pavement.
And, you know, they just tell you they're going to kick your brains out.
Right.
And so I believed them.
And I tell you what, I couldn't even sleep at night hardly.
You know, I mean, I'd wake up at night wondering where I was, you know, if everything was OK.
But we'd go out.
Sometimes they'd get us up at three o'clock in the morning and take us out.
And I guess you'd say the bay and the water is about three feet deep or two and a half.
And we'd have our full pack and they would.
you had to pick up your knees just like you did in football, you know, we'd run the tires.
And, of course, you couldn't shove the water.
So that was just one of our trainings.
I guess one of the things that was probably the most scariest was when we fought with bayonets, you know, we took everything, every segment.
And so we were fighting with bayonets and hand-to-hand combat.
And I...
uh about the after about the third or fourth day they said take it about 112 degrees too out there. They said uh okay now we take those covers off those bayonets and boy did they shine, and sharp as razors, and there's a lot of guys got hurt right, but uh it was a it was some people think well that's not good, but you know I mean you may hurt your buddy or you know you're fighting for your life too and he is so when you get over there but
Here's the way I looked at it.
If you're going to play football, you've got to practice tackling and blocking.
And if you're going to fight for your life, you've got to go through the real stuff.
And so there was a number of things, but that's just one.
You were part of the 1st Marine Division that got a little extra training because you were headed to Okinawa for the final invasion of the war.
And like we said at the beginning, this was supposed to be the staging area for the assault in Japan.
Let's go ahead and get there to Okinawa.
A lot of the Marines had been sent to
to Iwo Jima for that final stand at Iwo Jima, but you were sent to Okinawa.
Talk about some of your thoughts about where you were going and your role in the battle.
Well, let me say just a few words about before we went there.
We did our training a couple or two or three places, but before we did for that, we went to Guadalcanal to actually take all of the
ammunition and everything there, and try to let those Japanese know that the war was over, and they were still, you know, snipering, and we were snipering, and then we went, but we had an island there called Pavuvu Island.
Right.
P-A-V-U-V-U.
I don't have any people that ever heard of it.
And it had one named White Beach.
It's close to Midway, and that's where we trained.
Right.
For about two or three, I'd say, two months.
Mm-hmm.
And because we were amphibious, so we were landing, and, you know, and...
out in the water and different things like that.
But then we spent 61 days on the troop ship, and you could just look out and see these ships every morning and that, and then battle wagons, cruisers, everything.
But we carried about 6,000 men on one troop ship.
And so when we got, I was just hoping I'd live to be 20.
And before we got there, of course, we didn't know all of what was going on.
Nobody did, but the higher-ups did.
And so the 2nd Marine Division actually landed on the south end of Okinawa.
And that was to pull as much of their troops and their guns that way.
And I was in the 1st Marine Division.
I mean, you know, so we, the 1st and the 6th Marine Division, we went around into the China Sea, and we hit about where the middle of Okinawa was at the Yontan Airfield.
And we got off of the ship out there, the troop ship, probably 10 miles or 15, 20 miles out.
And we were on these little LSVP, you know, and landing craft vehicle personnel.
And so probably about 10 or 15 Marines on each one.
And these cocksmen, they need to get you up where your water wasn't over your head, so when you got out of the boat, you know, before you hit the beach.
So we hit that, and in three days, we cut Okinawa in two, and the 10th Army went south, and we went north.
And about two weeks, we secured the north, because most of their
big guns and everything had been pulled south with our 2nd Marine Division landing there.
And after they landed, they actually landed there, and then they pulled back off of there, but we had them trapped down there.
And after you secured the north, then you headed back down south, and that was really one of the first times, or one of the significant times, that you really witnessed the horror of war, I know, because of what you saw when you headed back south.
Talk about that.
Well, of course, you know, it had been a lot of big
bombs dropped and there had been a lot of those big 16-inch shells, you know, laid in there.
But there was, I really felt sorry for our troops because you couldn't take a step, three or four steps in any direction without stepping on a dead Jap or a dead soldier.
Right.
You know, we actually then joined up with the 10th Army at the Yontan Airfield and started pushing south.
And that's what took a lot of time because they were real fortified.
You know, they had big guns that they'd bring out at night.
And, well, I was on a flamethrower quite a bit.
and, you know, you strap on your back.
And I wasn't so much worried about getting hit myself or shot as I was that napalm getting hit, you know, I mean, there because he was a goner.
And I've actually seen those big flame throwers on those tanks shoot out and actually just, if you take a matchstick and, you know, you burn it down, and I didn't realize that there was so much liquid in a person, a human being.
or you know that they would just melt you know on on and just still be just a skeleton there right talk about what you saw as part of the japanese and their their method of doing battle was obviously very unique they were they they were fight to the death attitude and uh their method of hiding themselves uh it was unbelievable they could hide for six or seven days and they they really were trained to
And they believed that they were going to be, you know, that was the rising sun.
You know, that was theirs.
That they would be actually doing a great service.
And as far as their religion is concerned, they believed that that would be the greatest thing they ever did.
Right.
But they would hide under things.
They would wait until they really had a chance to get two or three of you if they could.
Right.
But they would actually hide in graves.
Oh, they hide... Talk about that incident.
They had these big tombs that they buried their dead in.
And, oh, they were everywhere.
Right.
In the side of these mountains or hills.
And they were probably about four feet thick with concrete and steel on the top.
But we...
We had to actually get these Japs out of there because they had big walls running on the side.
And then they had these here big blocks about a two by two, two feet by two feet.
And they would be sealed, cemented in there.
But whenever you, the Japanese started taking those out and taking the bones out of there and getting in there and using that as a cover.
So we had to get them, you know, we had to get them out of there.
Right.
And I think you saw the other day on mine.
I told you it was my turn to go in one of those one time.
And I got down there real close to it.
And I could see that it had been knocked out.
And this little, there was about, you know, about a half or two, maybe three quarters of an inch across the top.
And then I saw these eyes, you know, shining right at me.
And I figured I was a goner.
Because, you know, they're going to kick it over and start, you know, getting after you.
But we had a,
I had the other boy besides the three of us that made the regionals all the way through.
But this John Kerry from Georgia was a boy that he wasn't afraid of the devil himself either.
And he said, I started crawling and rolling and getting out of there because I figured he was going to mow me down.
And he laughed.
He said, hey, let me take care of this little chore.
So he went down there, and luckily they were out of ammunition, or he probably wouldn't have made it back either.
But he went in there, and he got those three, if I remember right, there were three Japanese soldiers in there, and we got them out.
And contrary to the way they do today, there was no way we could take prisoners there.
I mean, a lot of people think, oh, you've got to take prisoners.
What are you going to do with them?
You know, you had nothing...
There's no place to, nobody to take them or keep them or whatever.
So we just had to, they did us the same way.
They just destroyed them right there.
Exactly, exactly.
And that was really, that was just day after day.
You live from one minute to the next, not from one hour to the next, trying to survive.
And on that particular time going north, many of our young men got killed by our own people for mistakes.
Right.
And that's why I think it helped me in my coaching when I got out.
Mistakes will beat you.
And so we were out one time there and our own planes come down and strafed us.
And I don't see how in the world they kept killing every one of us because you could see the shells hitting the ground and we had nothing to get, no ditch to get in or no trees to get behind or anything.
And it was, you know, really scary, but luckily I didn't get hit, but a lot of them did.
And so, but that's just one instance that, you know, those big guns sitting out there 30 miles away, those big 16-inch guns, when they come over you and go,
and they're trying to get them just over the front lines, maybe 50 yards or 100 yards, something like that.
But if somebody back there on that ship didn't put the right amount of TNT behind it, or they didn't have exactly the right elevation, and all the communication had to be right, they might have wiped out, and in some instances it did wipe out
a lot of people or a lot of our men.
Let's look at some photographs right now from your service from your service time.
We've got about a half a dozen pictures here and here's the first one there's a good-looking marine right there about how old were you then was that when you first went in?
That's when I first got right after I got in and and right out of boot camp right right yeah and yes I didn't
And that is another one about the same way.
With some of the metals surrounding that picture, this is actually from a larger picture that you have hanging in your home that I believe your son Marty put together, sort of a collage of your World War II memorabilia.
So talk about that picture.
And I oversold with a sniper, but we trained on every weapon that the Marine Corps had so that we could fill in in Abel Company, Baker Company, and Charlie Company, that's what they call them,
in the 1st Marine Regiment.
And if they got, let's say they got four flamethrowers, that's what happened right off the bat.
Four flamethrowers got killed.
So they say, Adkins, Smith, Jones, and whatever, you know, be ready to move out in five minutes.
We take their place.
And so the first time we were up on the front line, we stayed up there, I believe it was about 21 days, something like that.
You'd never change clothes.
You was in the mud and everything and nothing.
And if you can imagine having a cast on, you know, how it does your flesh.
And so then they would take, they fixed these showers back behind, back behind the lines, maybe, you know, a few hundred yards.
And we would, you cut your stuff off, your leggings and all that, you know, cut it off.
And you took these showers, but, you know, your flesh was pretty, I still have a little problem with that.
Right.
You know, I mean, on you.
But then about one or two days that issue your new clothes, new leggings, new shoes and everything, you go back up again.
Yeah, do it again.
You're right up on the front.
Here's another picture with the... That gun right there is a 37 millimeter anti-tank gun.
We knocked out tanks for that.
We knocked the chains off of them.
And we had some really... It's a high-powered...
Also, we had canister we could shoot in that, and the canister in that gun was like a shotgun, big pellets, and it would mow down when these Japanese had those banzai charges.
They'd just try to overrun you, and sometimes did, but we cut down a lot of them with that.
That is my buddy, Hugh Tau, on our left.
That's me on the right.
And we had, this is once when we went back, like I told you, you know, back behind the lines, we played around a little bit.
Hugh Tau was a Sunday school teacher from Seabree, Kentucky.
And he was really a fine man.
He was about six or seven years older than I was.
He was in the Aleutian Islands.
And he and I met up on Puvuvu Island when we were training in the South Pacific.
And so we became very good friends.
And after we got home, after we got married, we went to see each other.
I'd go see him one year, he'd come see me the next year.
Wonderful.
This is a photograph of a group of you with a memorabilia from the war, a Japanese flag.
You're the one standing behind the flag, we believe, in that picture.
How do you remember that you came?
Obviously, that was from either a Japanese soldier that you all killed or captured, I guess, right?
Yes, I have a sword that was off one of their officers, and my son Marty's got that now, and I gave it to him.
Also, I had three guns that we took off, you know,
killed the Japanese, and I got them, and I know Marty's got one of them now, and it was a .25 caliber, that's what they were, that we took.
Also, I killed another officer that had a camera, and so I took a lot of pictures with it, but didn't know if they would be any good.
When I got back to the States, I did, and probably about 100 pictures,
And a lot of those was in China where I took them.
Right.
And so after we left Okinawa after they dropped the bombs.
So I took a lot of good pictures there and there's a lot of gruesome things in China that, you know, the way they did there, you had to belong to some something.
You had to have a, you know, that you had a boss or a company that you worked for.
Right.
And if you were a
kind of like our stray dogs and stray cats or whatever.
If you were, didn't, wasn't documented and didn't have that, they rounded you up.
Right.
If nobody came to claim you, they would cut your heads off.
And we went to one of those places.
I even took pictures of it.
Every week they had a, if nobody took care of it, they had a compound and they had them down on their knees and their hands behind their back and they tied them and
And it just went, you know, I mean, they used a big machete.
And I didn't realize that you could cut a person's head off or, you know, at the neck so easy.
But those machetes, I guess, you know, that guillotine they used to have, you know, something like that.
But this was pretty simple.
But I can tell you one thing.
You better be documented.
And, you know, actually, they would actually, you could buy a girl for $3.00.
And a boy cost you about $21.
Wow.
This is what you're talking about now is during the occupation time.
We're going to talk about that.
One of the hardest duties that you had in Okinawa is what you called outpost duty.
And it was during the nighttime.
Talk about that.
And there was an incident involving that when you were in outpost duty.
To what extent you want to talk about that also.
But obviously that was one of the hardest and most dangerous duties that you had.
We have a few minutes.
Talk about that.
Okay.
Actually, probably the most dangerous thing was that you had to go out there, pick out six men, and each company would, but they'd send them out in front of the front lines.
Actually, we had to get out there just about dusk and get situated.
And so that we, when the Japsons started to come in, we could, we'd open fire and then our front lines would throw up flares and they could see and that helped them.
We kind of, actually what it was is warning them before they got to them.
Right.
And so usually what the hardest part was, if you didn't get killed out there, is getting back.
Because if you went back
At night, your own men are going to kill you.
If you go in daytime, the Japanese snipers are going to get you.
Right.
And this happened to a lot of young men.
And this one night, we were having a... Actually, I was on that 37-millimeter gun that you saw there a while ago, and we had a 100% alert.
I wasn't out on the outpost that night, but I was behind the right wheel of that gun.
And we dug in, dug deep, you know, I mean, our foxholes, one on each side.
And then there was two, my buddy Hugh there was in underneath the, there was two men underneath that gun on, you know, where we had a tarp over it to kind of keep it from getting wet.
So when we started firing it.
And so that night, probably about two o'clock in the morning, and there was a little ridge about maybe 15 feet there in front of us.
We always tried to get behind a ridge.
where the line would go.
And so about that time, this man come over that, you know, and I thought he was a Jap.
You know, that's what he looked like.
And he was kind of bent down and he just came over that ridge and coming right straight towards me.
And so I shot him.
Right.
And I know that, you know, and so he fell in my foxhole with me.
And I thought he was a Jap, see, all the time.
And I knew that if that Jap wasn't killed or wasn't dead, that he would actually, they always strapped stuff, you know, explosives around them.
And they had grenades and everything on them.
but he was going to probably blow us both up, or, you know, me up.
And so, but everything stood, sat real still, and he never did move, and I didn't move.
And so I know my buddy Hugh was right there within two feet of me.
He thought, he wasn't sure whether I was killed or whether the, you know, whether the Jap was still alive or what, because if he was, he'd be killing them too.
So, but the next morning, uh,
Actually, about daylight, I realized that there was a parka, you know, one of our parkas on this man, and he was one of our Marines that had been sent out.
He was on one of them outposts down from another company, and he had been trying to get back.
I knew this because they told me about it.
He had been lost, but he was trying to get back to his outfit, but
You know, he was always moving, you know, the line and everything.
The line's going to be moving forward and that.
But anyway, it really hurt me.
And the colonel, they came up and got me, took me back, and the colonel talked to me, and he wanted to know how it was affecting me and if I thought I could continue to be, you know.
And I certainly didn't want to pull back off the line because you might be put anywhere then.
So I wanted to stay with my outfit.
I told him I was fine.
There wasn't anything I could do but what I did.
Exactly.
But this happened so many times, and it's either kill or be killed.
That was what they put in our heads from the word go.
Right.
Kill or be killed and a one-way ticket.
You didn't worry about coming back.
Indeed.
You were on the line, that outpost line, for 27 straight days, never took a shower.
You were in battle for...
the 81 days of the Battle of Okinawa.
And you said that when you went in, you weighed 202 pounds, and when you came out, you weighed 146.
We're out of time for this show.
Next week, we're going to talk about, after the...
The truce was signed, but the war still kept going on in occupation duty.
And we're going to talk about some football next week.
Thank you for being with us.
That would be great.
I appreciate it.
Thank you.
You bet.
There is obviously more to tell of this remarkable career, the occupation of China when the war was over, but the fighting didn't really stop.
And next week, we'll talk some football.
So please join Coach Ray Adkins and me next week on Veterans of the Valley.
[Silence.]
[Music.]